=== PAGE 1 ===
ReceivedJune21,2021,acceptedJuly5,2021,dateofpublicationJuly13,2021,dateofcurrentversionJuly23,2021.
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3096823
uTHCD: A New Benchmarking for
Tamil Handwritten OCR
NOUSHATHSHAFFI ANDFAIZALHAJAMOHIDEEN
DepartmentofInformationTechnology,UniversityofTechnologyandAppliedSciences,SuharPC311,Oman
Correspondingauthor:NoushathShaffi(noushath.mys@gmail.com)
ABSTRACT TherobustnessofatypicalHandwrittencharacterrecognitionsystemreliesontheavailability
of comprehensive supervised data samples. There has been considerable work reported in the literature
aboutcreatingthedatabaseforseveralIndicscripts,buttheTamilscripthasonlyonestandardizeddatabase
up to date. This paper presents the work done to create an exhaustive and extensive unconstrained Tamil
Handwritten Character Database (uTHCD). The samples were generated from around 850 native Tamil
volunteersincludingschool-goingkids,homemakers,universitystudents,andfaculty.Thedatabaseconsists
of about 91000 samples with nearly 600 samples in each of 156 classes. This isolated character database
is made publicly available as raw images and Hierarchical Data File (HDF) compressed file. The paper
also presents several possible use cases of the proposed uTHCD database using Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) to classify handwritten Tamil characters. Several experiments demonstrate that training
on the proposed database helps traditional and contemporary classifiers perform on par or better than the
existingdatasetwhentestedwithunseendata.Withthisdatabase,weexpecttosetanewbenchmarkinTamil
handwrittencharacterrecognitionandserveasalaunchpadfordevelopingrobustlanguagetechnologiesfor
theTamilscript.
INDEX TERMS Convolutionalneuralnetwork(CNN),documentanalysis,handwritingrecognition,Indic
scripts,opticalcharacterrecognition,Tamilhandwrittencharacterdatabase.
NOMENCLATURE I. INTRODUCTION
Acronyms Tamils or Tamilians is one of the world’s oldest surviv-
CM ConfusionMatrix ing ethnolinguistic groups with a demographic population
CNN ConvolutionalNeuralNetwork currently estimated to be around 76 million with a history
ePCP enhancedPiece-wiseCoveringbyParallelogram of this language dating back over 2000 years [1], [2]. Out
FPR FalsePositiveRate of22officiallanguagesofIndia,itistheonlylanguagethat
GT GroundTruth has been considered an official language outside of India,
HDF HierarchicalDataFormat asinSrilankaandSingapore[3].Inaddition,scriptsofseveral
HPL HPL-iso-tamil-charDataset minorityIndianlanguagessuchasBaduga,Irula,Saurashtra,
KNN K-NearestNeighbour and Paniya are written in Tamil although its spoken version
OCR OpticalCharacterRecognition isentirelydifferentfromthatofTamil[3].
PCP Piece-wiseCoveringbyParallelogram Even though a sizeable population around the globe uses
RF RandomForest theTamillanguageasoneoftheofficialorasborrowedscript-
SOTA State-of-the-Art inglanguages,researchinTamilhandwritingrecognitionin
SVM SupportVectorMachine several application domains has not reached its complete
TPR TruePositiveRate maturity[4]–[6].TamilHandwrittencharacterrecognitionis
one such challenging research topic for close to 4 decades
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and now [7], [8]. Despite this, it continues to offer many chal-
approvingitforpublicationwasGustavoOlague . lenges which keeps the research community active even till
VOLUME9,2021 ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0License.Formoreinformation,seehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 101469

=== PAGE 2 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
date [9], [10]. The OCR of printed documents has been throughonlinedata(asintheHPLdatabase)donotrepresent
considered a problem solved par human accuracy or even these variations. Moreover, capturing these variationsin the
better [11]–[13]. However, the OCR of Tamil handwritten databasewillprovemoreeffectiveindevolopingrobustalgo-
documentposescriticalchallenges(forex:overlappingchar- rithms. Especially when processing offline documents such
acter patterns, complex character formation, diverse writing aslegalandlegacydocuments,handwrittenformconversions
styles even within the writing of a single user, etc.) which andthelike.
necessitate rectifiable steps before being deployed in real Inthisstudy,wepresentthedevelopmentofanexhaustive
time[14]. database with handwritings involving many Tamil writers
The research in this field is equally instigated by many and its use-cases from OCR perspectives. The prominent
application-oriented domains such as document structure contributionofthisworkcanbeoutlinedasbelow:
analysis and segmentation, writer identification in forensic
1) Asuccinctpresentationwithappropriatesignpostingof
intelligence, digitization of legal and legacy documents [5],
thecompleteprocessinvolvedincreatingstandardized
[12],[15]–[17].Moreover,sinceTamillanguageisoneofthe
TamilHandwrittencharactersamples.
officiallanguagesinIndia,Srilanka,andSingapore,theavail-
2) Thisdatabaseismadepubliclyavailabletotheresearch
ability of a robust Tamil handwritten OCR would pave the
community along with ground truth (GT) for rapid
wayfortheautomationofalargeswathofofficialdocuments.
prototypingandbenchmarkingpurposes.
Extensive work relating to the Indic script has been
3) SeveralCNN-centricexperimentationswereconducted
reported in this field of handwriting recognition which is
to create the benchmark. Furthermore, the popular
evidentthroughnumerouspublications[18].Thiswasmainly
VGG16 pre-trained ImageNet model was fine-tuned
possible due to the availability of standardized databases of
fortheclassificationofTamilcharactersandtheirper-
many Indic scripts [19]–[29]. There are about 19 standard-
formancewasanalyzed.
izedhandwrittendatasetsavailableforIndicscriptssuchas
4) Intending to analyze the benefit of the proposed
Devanagari,Bengali,Telugu,Oriya,Tamiletc[18].
database,severaltraditionalandSOTAclassifierswere
The recent survey of handwritten Indic OCR technolo-
trainedusingtheproposedandexistingdatabases.
gies [18] reveals that out of 19 databases, only a solitary
Themainmotivationsbehindcarryingoutthisworkare:
standardizeddatabase[19],[30]isavailableforTamilscript
developed by HP Labs, India.1 This database is publicly 1) Non-availability of multiple databases that can pose
available and was created using online pen coordinates by diverse challenges inherent in a typical offline hand-
applying a simple piece-wise interpolation process. Most writingOCR.
of the work reported in Tamil handwriting recognition has 2) Non-existenceofastandardizedhandwritingdatabase
relied mainly on this database [9], [10]. However, for more thatcancapturevariationsemergingfromofflinepro-
objective study and to evaluate the true efficacy of state- cessingofdocuments.
of-the-art(SOTA) algorithms, having multiple standardized 3) Toevaluateobjectivelyseveralclassicalmachinelearn-
publicly available datasets exhibiting a variety of inherent ing and SOTA deep learning algorithms using the
writing variations can only add more value to the resulting uTHCDdatabaseandbenchmarktheresults.Thiswill
experimentalanalysis. act as a catalyst in advancing research in Tamil hand-
UnliketheHPLdatabase[19],[30],theuTHCDdatabase writingrecognition.
isaunifiedcollectionofsamplescollectedfrombothoffline Thisworkisanextensionofthepreviouslypublishedpaper
online modes. In the offline mode, samples were collected where we had reported the preliminary work [31] done in
byaskingvolunteerstowriteonaphysicalformwithoutany creatingtheuTHCDdatabase.2
restriction on the writing tool (pen, pencil, gel pen, sketch Organization of the rest of this manuscript is as fol-
pen, etc.). In the online mode, volunteers were asked to lows: Section II describes the details about the Tamil
write samples using a digital writing pad on a digital form script,anoverviewofexistingTamilhandwrittendatabases,
(a predefined grid image). In both processes, the samples and works reported using them. Section-III presents the
written by volunteers are extracted and stored eventually as systematized process involved in creating this database,
imagefiles. such as data collection, preprocessing, verification, and
While online samples successfully capture different writ- making the database suitable for the experimentation
ing styles, salient features of offline samples pose even process. In Section-IV, we set the new benchmark for
morechallenges.Specifically,sharpboundaries,discontinu- this database through the application of standard CNN
ity of stroke occurring due to scanning and several subse- algorithms. Section-V presents the comparative study
quent preprocessing, variable thickness of character stroke between the proposed dataset against the existing dataset
due to the usage of different writing tools add more varia- using traditional and contemporary classifiers. Finally, the
tion to the database. Offline counterpart samples generated
2Asasequel,thispaperextendsinseveralwayssuchasbroadeneddata
1ThisdatabaseisofficiallyknownasHPL-iso-Tamil-char.Forbrevity, collectionprocess,groundtruthpreparation,makingdatasetpubliclyavail-
werefertoitasHPLdatabaseinrestofthepaper. able,etcarefewprominentimprovementsamongseveralothercontributions.
101470 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 3 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE1. Vowels,consonants,ayuthaezhuthuandgranthalettersoftamilscript.
FIGURE2. Compoundcharacterformationforaconsonantwithsetofvowels.
conclusion and future avenues based on this work are pre- databasedevelopedbyHPlabsIndia,availablefortheTamil
sentedinSection-VI. OCRdomain[18].
1) THEHPLINDIADATABASE:THE
II. BACKGROUNDSTUDY
HPL-ISO-TAMIL-CHARDATABASE
A. TAMILSCRIPT
Thisdatabasecontainsavaryingnumberofisolatedcharacter
The Tamil script contains 12 vowels, 18 consonants, and
samplesineachof156distinctcharacterclasses.Mostofthe
onespecialcharacterknownasAyudhaEzhuthu.Additional
characterclasseshavearound500samples,whilefewclasses
five consonants known as Grantha Letters are borrowed
have about 270 samples. The maximum number of samples
from Sanskrit and English to represent words/syllables of
in a class is 527, while the minimum is 271. The database
north Indian and English origin [2]. Hence the script con-
consistsoftwoseparaterepositoriesfortrainingandtesting.
tains36uniquebasicletters[12vowels+18consonants+
Therearearound50691and26926samplesavailablerespec-
1 Ayudha Ezhuthu + 5 Granthas]. Fig.1 shows these basic
tively for training and testing purposes [19]. The database
characters. The combination of twelve vowels and eighteen
contains77617samplesintotalfromallclasses.
consonants gives rise to 216 compound characters resulting
ThesampleswerewrittenbynativeTamilwritersandcol-
in 247 characters [216+12+18+1]. Example formation
lectedusingHPTabletPCs.Asmentionedearlier,imagesof
of compound characters for a consonant is shown in the
sampleswerecreatedthroughaninterpolationprocessusing
figure Fig.2. Furthermore, the five grantha letters combine
onlinepencoordinateswithaconstantthickeningfactorand
withtwelvevowelssimilarlytoformadditional60compound
are available for download in a bi-level TIFF format. Fig.5
letters, leading to 312 characters [247 + 5 Granthas + 60
showssomesampleimagesofthisdatabase.Moredetailsof
Compound Granthas]. The entire character set comprising
thisdatabasecanbefoundonthelipitoolkitwebsite[30].This
312 characters of the script is shown in Fig.3 [2]. How-
databaseisthede-factostandardamongtheresearchcommu-
ever, the 156 distinct characters (shaded grey) can uniquely
nity for Tamil OCR. One can easily find numerous quality
represent these 312 characters. This is because, as depicted
papers in the literature that used this database [32]–[35].
in Fig.4, two different syllables of the word [Ko-vai] can
KavithaandSrimathi[32]haverecentlyusedthisdatabaseto
berepresentedusingfivedistinctcharacters(numbersinthe
testtheefficacyof9-layerCNNarchitecturewhichachieved
figureindicatetheunderlyingclassnumber).
a training accuracy of 95.16% and test accuracy of 97.7%.
However,thisdatabasehasthefollowinglimitations:
B. EXISTINGTAMILHANDWRITTENDATABASE 1) Imbalance in the dataset: Several classes are under-
Acomprehensivedatabaseplaysavitalroleintheadvance- represented in this collection. The machine learning
mentofanyresearchtopic[19].Itwillfacilitateresearchersto algorithms learn to predict the dominant classes cor-
rapidlyevaluatenewmodelsanddeveloprobustalgorithms, rectlymoreoftenthantheunderrepresentedclass[36].
especiallywhentheunderlyingdatabaseisunconstrainedand Due to an imbalance in the dataset, algorithms using
comprehensive.Theavailabilityofacomprehensivedatabase this collection will have to use different evaluation
canalsohelptoobjectivelyassessthetrueefficacy/limitations metrics such as F1 score per class, recall per class,
of SOTA algorithms [18]. Developing a robust Tamil OCR precision per class other than just accuracy. Another
system necessitates a large and extensive database [10]. optionwouldbetoresamplethedatasetsothatthedata
As mentioned earlier, there is only a single standardized is balanced either by augmentation or undersampling
VOLUME9,2021 101471

=== PAGE 4 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE3. Completecharactersetoftamilscript.
2) Constrained Data Collection: All samples are col-
lectedbydigitalmeans.However,asmentionedearlier,
such samples are not true representatives of samples
oftenseeninofflineOCRapplications.
2) AD-HOCDATABASES
One can find numerous works in the literature that present
handwritten Tamil OCR algorithms by training them on
databasescreatedin-house[9],[37]–[40].Manyworksappar-
FIGURE4. Twosyllables(notamong156classes)representedby
ently collected minimal data [37], [38]. Kowsalya and Peri-
5distinctcharactersofthedatabase.
asamy [38] proposed an algorithm for Tamil OCR by
usingelephant-herdoptimization.Forexperimentalpurposes,
(throwawayexamplesofdominantclasses).Onlythen the authors have made use of limited samples collected
themodeldevelopedusingthisdatabasecanbesuitable from different native Tamil speakers. Jose and Wahi [39]
forreal-worldapplications. have collected samples from 100 users, with each class
101472 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 5 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
3) Various other methods proposed by different authors
in the literature are giving good performance only on
data prepared in an ad-hoc way. Therefore, such an
algorithm cannot be reliably deployed for practical
applications.
Weovercomethegapsmentionedabovebypresentingthe
comprehensive uTHCD database in this paper. The uTHCD
databasewillbethesecondpublicrepositoryforTamilOCR
purposes. Thus, the research community can evaluate the
algorithms on multiple databases instead of relying on a
single database that contains only online samples. Table 1
summarisessomenoteworthyTamilhandwritingdatarepos-
itories that are reported. The asterisk alongside the name of
thedatabaseindicatesthattheyarenotdesignedprimarilyfor
OCRpurposesbutforspecifichandwritingrecognitiontasks.
TABLE1. Descriptionofsometamilhandwritingdatabases.
FIGURE5. SampleimagesfromtheHPLdatabase.
having 100 samples. There is no mention of how many
classes are considered for data collection and experimenta-
tion. Shanthi and Duraiswamy [40] have trained the system
with 35441 characters belonging to 106 Tamil characters.
The database was created through the contribution of
117volunteers.Thetestdatahad6048samplesbelongingto
only34characterclasses.Vinothenietal.[9],havecreateda
databasecomprising54600sampleswith350samplesineach
of156 categories.This workdoesnot indicatethetrain-test
split.
Itcanbeascertainedthatad-hocdatabasessufferfromsev-
eral drawbacks such as in-house creation, publicly unavail-
able, in-comprehensiveness and insufficient samples. This
will impedethe research community incarrying out acom-
parativeanalysisofalgorithmsproposedintheliterature[19].
At least, if these databases are made publicly available,
the research community will have choices and can con- III. DATABASEWORK
tributetoeasyprototypingandevaluationofnewTamilOCR The database creation is a laborious process that involves
models. many tasks such as sample collection, data extraction, car-
Based on this survey of the literature, the following gaps rying out necessary postprocessing, verification, and finally
areidentified:
making it ready for experimentation by associating it with
1) Unlike any other languages such as English, Ara- GT.Theprotocolwefollowedadherestostandardsadopted
bic, or even certain Indic scripts such as Devanagari, in the database creation literature [19], [22], [25], [43] as
Bangla,Oriya,etc.,therearenomultiplestandardized anymistakewouldnullifyalleffortsandaffectbenchmarking
publiclyavailabledatabasesforHandwrittentheTamil process. The overall process involved is as shown in Fig.6.
OCRprocesswhichcouldinvolvediversityofwriting Thissectionsuccinctlypresentsallstepsinvolvedincreating
stylesbymanypeople[18]. thisdatabaseandpossiblyservesasafutureguideformore
2) Majority of the standard papers deal with the HPL similarworks.
dataset.Thisdatabasehelpedtriggeranampleamount
of research in offline Tamil handwriting recognition. A. SAMPLECOLLECTION
However, few limitations exist, such as insufficient Thedatabaseisaunifiedcollectionofsamplescollectedfrom
samplesincertainclassesandsamplesnotbeingatrue offline and online modes. The overall process involved in
representativeofofflinescanneddocuments. both is the same except that the online mode was relatively
VOLUME9,2021 101473

=== PAGE 6 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE6. TheimportantstepsinthecreationofuTHCDdatabase.
straightforward as it did not necessitate preprocessing the sample would not drift much from the typical writing
documentthroughtheskewestimationstep. styleoftheTamilscript[19].
TheofflinedatacollectionprocessstartswithtwoA4-sized Themosttime-consumingpartofdatacollectionwasinthe
forms,namelyform-1andform-2,eachhavinga10×8sized
offlinemodeasitinvolvedawaitingperiodwherewecould
gridwithaspecificplaceandspaceforwritingeachcharacter. notreliablyreceivealltheformsfromvolunteerscourieredto
The form-1 collects samples of the first 80 characters of differentpartsoftheworld.
Tamil script, and the remaining 76 characters were filled in
form-2. In total, 400 forms (200 each of form-1 and form- B. PREPROCESSINGANDSAMPLEEXTRACTION
2) were distributed to 400 different volunteers. Hence, each Theofflinedatacollectionformsarefirstdigitizedat300DPI
volunteereitherfillsform-1orform-2;thereby,200complete throughanHPflatbedmulti-functionalscanner.Thescanned
sets of samples pertaining to 156 classes were collected. imagewasthenassignedauniquethree-digitnumberbetween
Each volunteer was requested to fill one form only because 001 to 600, indicating the volunteer code. After digitizing
castingacompletesetof156characterswouldcausepossible theform,itundergoesspecificpreprocessingstepsbeforean
lethargyandmayleadtounnecessaryprocessingofsamples automatedtaskextractsindividualcharacterspresentineach
thatarenotatruerepresentativeoftheunderlyingcharacter formusingasimplePythonscript.Atfirst,thescannedimage
class. A sample physical form used in this data collection Imgwasbinarizedusingsimpleglobalthresholding(whereT
processisshowninFig.7. isapresetthreshold):
A similar high-resolution grid image (digital form) was
(cid:40)
designed for an online sample collection process. Each vol- Img(x,y)= 1, ifImg(x,y)≥T (1)
unteer was asked to write in the predefined space like the 0, otherwise
offline mode. The samples written by volunteers using a
Subsequently, median filtering and size-based connected
digital writing pad were later extracted and saved as image
component empirical analysis were carried out to eliminate
files. The samples collected in the offline and online mode
isolated pixels and irrelevant clusters of pixels arising due
were curated to contain approximately 600 samples from
to various reasons such as dust in the scanner bed, liquid
each class. The online and offline samples are constituting
spillage, smudging, etc. The scanned image was then skew
around 70% and 30% of the database, respectively. This
corrected using the ePCP algorithm [44]. This algorithm
whole process involved contributions from around 450 vol-
accurately computes the skew angle by searching for white
unteersoveraperiodof2years.Thedatacollectionhappened
sections(thelongestpossiblerunofwhitepixels)atdifferent
amongstudentsandstaffbelongingtoseveralschools,univer-
angles.Theanglethatproducesmaximumwhitesectionsis
sities,andcommunityplaceswheretherearesizeablenative
deemedastheskewangleofthedocument[44].Weexercised
Tamilspeakers.Thedatahasbeencollectedfromvolunteers
extremecautionwhilefeedingthepageduringthescanning
belongingtodifferentagegroups,gender,andvaryinghand-
process to ensure minimal skew. This helped us keep the
edness.Thestatisticaldistributionofvolunteerdetailsshown
ePCPprofilingintherangeof−5◦to+5◦withanincrement
inFig.8.
of 0.1◦ for each step, ensuring minimal computation. The
Somequalitychecksweensuredduringthisprocessare:
same steps were repeated for digital forms as well, except
1) Thevolunteerwasaskedtoprovidethesamplewithin that they were not subjected to the skew correction step for
the cells in the grid to not overlap with characters obviousreasons.Thepseudocodeoftheoverallpreprocessing
in adjacent cells. A negligible amount of samples stepsappliedisgiveninAlgorithm-1.
breached this, but it was easy for us to discard such As both offline and online samples were collected by
samplesduringtheverificationprocess. asking volunteers to write within the grid, we used starting
2) Each volunteer must have formally studied the Tamil coordinatesofthegrid,andwithappropriateheightandwidth
languageasaprimary/secondarylanguageduringtheir increments resulted in the accurate extraction of character
school. This ensures that writing style captured in the samples.Sampleswereaggregatedinoneofthe156classes
101474 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 7 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE7. A10×8gridbasedsamplecollectionform.
based on their location in the grid. In this way, each class C. SAMPLEVERIFICATION
contains samples from both online and offline modes col- Twolevelsofverificationwerecarriedouttoensurethatsam-
lected from all volunteers. Each sample will be saved using ples extracted are true representatives of underlying Tamil
thefilenameconvention:xxxx_yyy,whereyyyrepresentsthe character classes. Form-by-form verification takes place in
underlying class number and xxxx corresponds to a 4-digit Level-1, whereas in Level-2, sample-by-sample verification
volunteernumberstartingseriallyfrom0001to0600(addi- happens. The complete verification process we followed is
tionalMSDdigitistoaccommodatefutureexpansion).This outlinedinFig.10.
wayyyywillalsoserveasGTforthecorrespondingsample In the Level-1 verification, we classify each form (both
and assist in the GT verification during the final verifica- physicalordigital)intothreecategories:
tion phase. For instance, samples in class-1 will be named 1) Fit: If the writing style of 90% or more of
0001_001, 0002_001, 0003_001, etc. To further distinguish the samples represents the corresponding character
between offline and online samples, the letter ‘s’ will be classes.
affixedintheformatasxxxxs_yyyy.Somesampleofflineand 2) RelativelyFit:Ifatleast50%ofthesamplesintheform
onlinesamplesthusextractedareshowninFig.9 representthecorrespondingcharacterclasses.
VOLUME9,2021 101475

=== PAGE 8 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
Algorithm1PreprocessingHandwrittenForms
Input:AScannedDocumentImage(Physical/DigitalForm)
Output:PreprocessedForm.
METHOD:
Step-1:BinarizetheImgusingglobalthresholding(Equation.1)
Step-2:NoiseRemoval
2.1:Img←ApplyMedianFilteringonImg.
2.2:Img←ConnectedComponentAnalysisandremove.componentswhosesize≤T
Step-3:SkewCorrectionusingePCPalgorithm
3.1:ComputeWhiteSections(PCP)ofImgbetween-5◦to+5◦instepsof2◦.
3.2:LetPCPθ correspondstoangleθ forwhichwhitesectionsaremaximum.
3.3:stepSize←1.0
whilestepSize≥0.1do
PCPθ+ ←computewhitesectionsatangle:θ +stepSize
PCPθ− ←computewhitesectionsatangle:θ −stepSize
θ ←argmax(PCPθ ,PCPθ+ ,PCPθ−)
θ
stepSize←stepSize/2
endwhile
3.4:preImg←SkewcorrectImgusingcomputedskewangleθ
This sample-by-sample manual verification occurs after the
datafileispreprocessed,andsamplesareextractedfromthe
fit and relatively fit categories. Then, the samples will be
eitherdiscarded(ifthesampledoesnotrepresentanyTamil
character class) or collected in an appropriate class. A few
essentialcommentsfromtheLevel-2verificationprocessare:
• Some samples had awful writing styles that were even
hard to be recognized correctly by humans. Such sam-
pleswereeventuallydiscarded.
• Many characters in Tamil script look almost the same
except for the presence or absence of a tiny loop,
dot/holecomponent,etc.Thisminorinter-classvariation
sometimescausesacharacterwritteninoneclasstobe
consideredinanappropriateclassthatresemblesbest.
• Someunintendedscratchmarksbyvolunteersaccompa-
niedthesamples.However,weretainedsamplesbyonly
carefully removing such marks instead of completely
ignoring the whole sample. This was found only in
samplescollectedinofflinemode.
Finally, for GT verification, we used the file naming con-
FIGURE8. Thevolunteerstatistics. vention(xxxxs_yyy)wefollowedduringthedataextraction
process.Whiledoingsample-by-sampleverification,wealso
3) Unfit:Ifthereisaconsiderablepercentageofsamples
cross-verified the GT (ie yyy) from the filename to ensure
that deviate much from the conventional style of the
it belongs to the correct class. In this way, a simple Python
character.
scripthelpedusgenerateaGTfilewithtwocolumnsofdata
The data deemed unfit are excluded from the rest of the that has filenames and corresponding class numbers as the
process and will not be collected in the eventual database. groundtruth.
Theremainingdatainthefitandrelativelyfitcategoriesare
subjecttopreprocessingandsampleextractionprocesses. D. THEuTHCD:UNCONSTRAINEDTAMIL
TheLevel-2verificationhastwomainobjectives:
HANDWRITTENCHARACTERDATABASE
1) Thesampleextractedrepresentsoneofthe156classes The samples thus collected after arduous processes is our
ofTamilscript. current uTHDC database with provision for subsequent
2) EnsureGTassociatedwiththesampleconformstothe expansion. There were varying numbers of samples in each
underlyingclass. class, but for data balancing and ease of future expansion,
101476 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 9 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE9. SampleofflineandonlineimagesintheuTHCDdatabase.
TABLE2. Detailsofvariousrepositoriesofproposeddatabase.
AllfourrepositoriesoftheuTHCDdatabasearepublicly
available(inthishyperlink)attheKagglewebsite-apopular
onlinedatasciencecommunity.Researcherscanusethepro-
videdhyperlinktovisittherepository.Inaddition,thedown-
loadabledatabaseisavailableintwodifferentformats:
1) The HDF5 format: The train and test set are stored
as Python NumPy multidimensional arrays by names
x_train, y_train, x_test, and y_test. These arrays can
then be compressed and stored in a single HDF5 file
format. Availability of the database through this for-
mat will enable researchers to rapidly acquire the
data, which will be suitable for direct experimenta-
tion without much preprocessing. The details of data
FIGURE10. TheverificationprocessinvolvedinuTHCDdatabase.
arrangement inside the HDF5 file (.h5 extension) and
supportingPythoncodetoextractthetrainandtestset
welimitedthenumberofsamplesineachclasstobeapprox- aregiveninAppendix.
imately 600. All 156 character classes of this database and 2) The Raw Image format: The total of 90950 images
correspondingclassidareasshowninFig.11.Themapping areavailableasasinglecompressedRARfile,includ-
ofUnicodesequenceswith156classesintheuTHDCisgiven ing ground truth files for both train and test fold-
inAppendix. ers. Researchers can then acquire this data according
The final database contains a total of 90950 images. The to their implementation preferences. The images are
offlinesamplesconstitutearound30%oftotalsamples,and storedinbinaryformat.
therestofallsamplesareonlinesamples.Thedatacollected
areavailableasseparaterepositorieswithdifferenttrain-test IV. BENCHMARKING
proportionsviz70-30(uTHCD_a),80-20(uTHCD_b),85-15 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have dominated
(uTHCD_c)and90-10(uTHCD_d).Weensuredtrainandtest most of the recent technological advancements in Artificial
folderstocontainbothofflineandonlinesamples.Arandom- Intelligence,especiallyinimagerecognitiontasks[45].The
izedprocesswasusedincreatingtheserepositories.Details main reason for that is the availability of large datasets,
abouteachoftheserepositoriesaretabulatedinTab.2. massivelyparallelizableGPUs,andabroadspectrumofopen
VOLUME9,2021 101477

=== PAGE 10 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE11. Mappingofclassnumberandtamilcharacters.
deep learning frameworks [46]. The CNNs are also vastly 2) Subsequently, we leverage a pre-trained SOTA CNN
famous for simultaneously circumventing the high dimen- and fine-tune it to classify Tamil characters using the
sionalityproblemandextractingrobustfeaturesforcomputer proposeddatabase.
vision tasks [47]. There are three main building blocks of a This set of experiments establishes several benchmarks for
CNN:i)convolutionallayers,ii)zeroormorepoolinglayers, theproposeddatabaseusingSOTAclassificationalgorithms.
andiii)oneormorefullyconnectedlayers.Variousarchitec- As this study predominantly uses the CNN architectures
tures have been proposed in the literature by varying these forreportingtheuse-casescenariosoftheproposeddataset,
buildingblocks[45]–[48],whichhaveobtainedoutstanding the overall flow diagram of the model building using CNN
results. is shown in Fig.12. The processing starts by loading the
In this section, we present possible use cases for the pro- uTHCDtrainandtestsets(eitherRAWimagesorHDF5for-
posed uTHCD database by conducting the following set of mat). Then, experiments are conducted by considering a
experiments: 70:30train-testsplit(theuTHCD_arepository).Thishelpsto
1) WefirstlearnaCNNfromscratchwithminimalbuild- comparetheresultswiththeexistingdatabaseasthenumber
ing blocks. This set of experiments demonstrates sev- of test samples is comparable in both repositories. Firstly,
eral use cases of the proposed database to address the validation set can be extracted from the training set by
the OCR classification problem from typical CNN slicingthelast7270samples(relevantPythoncodesaregiven
perspectives. in Appendix). In the next step, the data suitable for model
101478 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 11 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE12. Thesequenceflowdiagramofmodelbuilding.
trainingisprepared.So,theimagefiles(x_train,x_test,and benchmarking using CNN models [49]. Accuracy refers to
x_val)areallnormalizedtohavethevaluesintherange[0,1], thefractionofcorrectlyclassifiedsamplesoverallsamples.
and the corresponding ground truth values (y_train, y_test Specificityisthefractionofsamplesclassifiedasbelonging
andy_val)areone-hotencoded. to the negative class over a total number of examples in
The CNN model can now be created with the proposed thenegativeclass.Inthecontextofmulticlassclassification,
sequence of Convolutional(ConvNet), Pooling (MaxPool), it can be interpreted as a fraction of samples correctly clas-
andfullyconnected(FC)layers.Inthisstep,wecaninstead sified as belonging to other classes over a total number of
leverage an existing SOTA CNN model (as discussed in samples belonging to different classes. This measure helps
Section IV-B). The model can then be configured with a todiscoverthefalsepositiverate(FPR)as1-specificity.The
presetlearningrate,optimizer,etc.Finally,themodelisready sensitivity(orrecall)measuresthetruepositiverate(TPR)—
to be trained for a fixed number of epochs with specific afractionofallsamplescorrectlyclassifiedasbelongingto
callbacks. We made use of the EarlyStoppingy Keras call- the same class over a total number of samples belonging to
back–thishelpstoterminatethetrainingprocesswhenthe same class. Finally, the F1-score is a weighted average of
lossisnolongerdecreasing.Ithasaregularizationeffectas precision and recall. The FPR, TPR, and F1-score reported
well, in addition to assisting in optimal usage of processor areaveragevaluesobtainedwiththeonevs.allstrategy[49].
resources.Finally,thetrainedmodelcanbesavedforfurther Implementation and subsequent evaluation were car-
testingpurposes. ried out on a machine with GPU (NVIDIA GeForce
We used four performance metrics: accuracy, specificity, MX330) running on top of an Intel i7 1.6 GHz proces-
sensitivity(recall),andF1-scoretoevaluateandestablishthe sor with 16GB RAM. The entire work was implemented
VOLUME9,2021 101479

=== PAGE 12 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE13. ThebasicCNNarchitectureused.
using Tensorflow end-to-end machine learning library with shown in Fig.16. It can be noted that the performance of
Keras API using Python 3.7.10 environment. Furthermore, Adam, Nadam, and RMSProp is comparable to each other
TensorRT 6.0neural network optimizer was synced with while they perform significantly better than AdaGrad and
NVIDIA to optimize memory consumption, throughput, AdaDelta.Furthermore,thebehavioroftheseoptimizerswas
latency,andpowerefficiency. similarwhenwechangedtheαfrom10−3to10−6instepsof
10−1.Basedonthisempiricalevidence,wefixedtheAdam
A. BASICCNNARCHITECTURE optimizerwithalearningrateα = 0.001forallsubsequent
WeaimtodesignaminimalistCNNarchitecturetoestablish experiments.
baseline accuracy for the proposed database. The research Next,weexperimentedtodeterminetheoptimalvaluefor
community can then offer efficient CNN architectures to batch size as it is a consequential hyperparameter in any
demonstraterobustperformanceusingtheuTHCDdatabase. network that controls the overall dynamics of the network
Wedesignedseveralcombinationsofarchitecturesbyvarying architecture [51]. We varied the batch size starting from 25
differenttypesofCNNlayerswitharestrictionofnotusing to 212 in steps of a power of 2. The plot of train, test,
more than two layers for each layer type (not counting the and validation accuracy vs. batch size is shown in Fig.14.
final classification layer). The combination that yielded the ThiswasimplementedwiththeEarlyStoppingKerascallback
best training accuracy is the proposed CNN architecture, observed on validation loss. From Fig.14, we can see that
asshowninFig.13.Asimilararchitecturealsoyieldedopti- batchsizedoesnotsignificantlyimpacttheaccuracy.Hence,
malresultsforvariouscomputervisionproblems[50]. we can conclude that algorithms using this database on a
The CNN architecture has two convolutional layers, two CNNcanpreferamini-batchgradientdescentwith32asan
pooling layers, and two fully connected dense layers. The optimalvalueforthebatchsizethatyieldsthesameaccuracy
inputlayercontains64×64sizedimages.Thearchitecture
without compromising much on the computational burden
canberepresentedas:64C2−MP2−64C2−MP2−1024N−
andspeedofthelearningmodel.
5128N, where nCj indicates a convolutional layer with n Apart from the learning rate, optimizer function, and
filtersandj×jkernel,MPk referstoamaxpoollayerwith batchsize,anotherinfluentialhyper-parameterknownasthe
k ×k kernel, and fN refers to a fully connected layer with activation function that must be fixed. Several activation
N neurons.Theoutputlayerisaclassifierwiththesoftmax functions such as tanh, sigmoid, ReLU, etc., are available
activationfunctiontoclassify156classes. for assisting the CNN to learn the complex patterns in the
ThestudyofoptimalvaluesforhyperparametersofCNN data.Weusedactivationfunctionswhicharegenerallyused
is a challenging task, and it is data dependent [46]. The in the literature [52] – Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) for
learning rate hyper-parameter α has a significant impact hidden layers and softmax for the final classification layer.
as the convergence of the model heavily depends on this The ReLU and softmax activation functions are defined as
parameter which needs to be carefully fixed to an optimal below:
value before tuning other hyperparameters. We conducted
an initial set of experiments by independently learning our ReLU(x) = max(0,x) (2)
CNNmodelusingdifferentoptimizers.Theperformanceof
e(xi)
these models (for α = 0.001) observed for 35 epochs is softmax(x) = σ(x)= (3)
i i (cid:80) e(xj)
j
101480 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 13 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE14. Accuracyforvaryingbatchsizes.
FIGURE15. Performanceontrainingvsvalidationsets.
wherex i istheinputvector.Finally,theXavierinitializerwas TABLE3. HyperparametersvaluesusedintheCNNarchitecture.
used to initiate the kernel values. For the rest of the CNN
based-experiments,unlessexplicitlymentioned,thehyperpa-
rametervaluesusedareshowninthetable-3.
Toobtainaholisticideaaboutthebehavioroftheproposed
CNNarchitecture,wefirsttrainedthemodelfor200epochs
(withoutthetriggeroftheEarlyStoppingcallback).Theplot
of accuracy and loss for training and validation sets are as
demonstratedinFig.15.Wecanobservethatalthoughtrain-
ing accuracy and loss have converged around ten epochs, function by outputting the class label corresponding to the
thevalidationlosskeepsincreasing.Thisisbecausethetrain- highest probability. It does not consider the magnitude of
ing accuracy/loss of a set is evaluated through the softmax corresponding class probability. In other words, although a
VOLUME9,2021 101481

=== PAGE 14 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
TABLE4. Dropoutintheconvolutionallayers.
betweentheseclassesareonlythroughthepresenceor
absenceofi)asmallhollowcircleinthetop(knownas
Anurava),orii)aloopattheendoftheupperstrokeor
iii)justelongationoftheprimarystroke.Observeevery
sixclassesstartingseriallyfromclass14to142,which
representsuchcompoundcharacters.
FIGURE16. Performanceofdifferentoptimizerswithα=0.001.
• Severalotherconsonants(forexample,class15and21,
67and79)havehighsimilarityintheirshapeduetothe
samereasonsoutlinedabove.
correctly classified sample with marginal probability con-
• Particular class triplets exhibit a very high similarity
tributes to the accuracy, the model is still penalized with
between them, for example (140, 141, 142),(126, 127,
loss.Thefluctuatingvalidationaccuracyisduetothemodel
128)etc.Thishighsimilaritycoupledwithuniquewrit-
pickingspuriouspatternsalongsomeusefulones.Thisbase-
ing styles further diminishes the already slight varia-
line model resulted in a training accuracy of 99.61% with a
tion that exists between these class triplets leading to
validationaccuracyof92%.
misclassification.
Next, we used the test set to evaluate the efficacy of the
Some of these observations are reflected in the CMs shown
model.Thetestsetobtainedanaccuracyof87.00%.Consid-
inFig.19.Hencewecanconcludethatthemisclassifications
ering the fact that human level performance can get nearly
that we observed are mainly due to the structural properties
0% error for handwritten OCR cases(which is also known
oftheTamilscript.
as Bayes error/optimal error), these results indicate that the
Wenextconductedexperimentstoresolvetheproblemof
proposedmodelsuffersfromthehighvarianceproblem.This
high variance our model suffered. One of the first things to
isbecausetheproposedCNNmodeloverfitsthetrainingdata
try when there is a high variance problem is regularization.
butperformssignificantlylesswithunseentestdata.Thiscan
Dropout is a popular regularization technique that we used
beaddressedindifferentwayssuchasimplementingregular-
toresolvethehigh-varianceissue.Srivastavaetal.[53],who
izationtechniquesorevenimplementingamoreappropriate
introduced the original dropout layer concept, used dropout
networkarchitecture.Ideally,theresultshouldindicatealow
(withprobability=0.5)ineachofthefullyconnectedlayers.
varianceandlowbiassituationwherethereisnotmuchgap
Itwasnotusedontheconvolutionallayers.So,weconducted
inthetrainandtesterror.
thefirstseriesofexperimentsbyvaryingthedropoutratein
Fig.17 shows the plot of misclassification errors for
the fully connected dense layers only. The result is shown
156classes.Someexamplemisclassifiedsamplesareshown
in Fig.20. The dropout probability of 0.45 and 0.5 curtailed
in Fig.18. For the misclassification study, the confusion
the train and test accuracy gap, thereby slight improvement
matrices3 (CMs)separatelyforsetofvowelsand18sample
towardsthehighvarianceproblem.Therefore,itcanbeascer-
compoundcharactersaredrawn,asshowninFig.19.Welist
tained that these results comply with what was suggested
below some error analysis we carried out by observing the
in[53].
GT associated with misclassified samples (Use Fig.11 for
Oflate,astudy[54]proposedapplyingthedropoutstrategy
reference):
in the convolutional layers as well, however, with a much
• Misclassificationhappensbetweenshortvowels(Kuril)
lower value of probability (0.1 or 0.2). Hence, to further
and long vowels (Nedil), which differ in their overall
mitigatethehighvarianceproblem,keepingthedropoutrate
shape with minor changes (e.g.:elongation of a stroke,
of 0.5 in the dense layers, we conducted the next set of
presenceoftinymodifier,etc.).Class1to12represents
experimentsbytryingthedropoutintheconvolutionallayers.
thesevowels.
Theresultsaretabulatedintable-4.Thebestaccuracyonthe
• Thereisahighbetween-classsimilarityamongthecom-
test set was obtained for a dropout probability of 0.10 and
pound characters formed out of vowel-consonant com-
0.05 in conv1 and conv2 layers, respectively which further
binations, leading to misclassification. The differences
shrunkthegapbetweenthetrainandtestaccuracy.However,
thetestaccuracyneedsfurtherimprovement.
3TheCMsweredrawnbytrainingseparatelywithmentionedvowelsand
The final set of experiments for this basic CNN was
setofcompoundcharacterssincevisualizinga156classCMisnoteasily
decipherable conducted to further shrink the train and test accuracy gap
101482 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 15 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE17. Misclassificationcountfor156classes–Totalmisclassificationis3650outof28080samples.
FIGURE18. Someexamplemisclassifiedsamplesfromthetestset(T:True,P:Predicted).
through data augmentation techniques. Data augmentation TABLE5. Resultsforvaryingaugmentationfactors.
aimstosupplementthetrainingsetbysynthesizingartificial
data from actual data [55]. Data augmentation has a reg-
ularization effect and hence reduces the overfitting of the
model [55]. We augmented the training data by applying
four variations: i) rotation (up to ±15 degrees), zoom (with
0.2 factor), and horizontal/vertical shift variations (up to
20 pixels) to the original samples. One or more of these
variations were applied to a sample to generate additional
examples. Fig.21 shows the example augmented images of balanced with an equal number of samples in all classes.
a character (class 7). This experiment was conducted with Secondly, a randomly chosen training image transforms as
establishedoptimaldropoutprobabilitiesineachlayerofthe mentioned earlier, and with this, the training set remained
model. relatively balanced. Results after augmentation using these
Two types of augmentation strategies were applied to two types are respectively shown in Table-5 and Fig.22.
generate additional samples. Firstly, every image in the TheDiffcolumnshowsthedifferencebetweentrainandtest
trainingsetisaugmentedbyimplementingoneormoremen- accuracy,whichwasinitially12.6%withouttheapplication
tionedvariance.Thisway,thetrainingsetremainedperfectly ofregularizationtechniques.
VOLUME9,2021 101483

=== PAGE 16 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE19. Confusionmatrices:Setofvowels(Left)andsetofcompoundcharacters(Right).
FIGURE20. DropoutintheDenselayers.
Itcanbeobservedfromboththeseresultsthatthevalida- validation set as that of the training set can also lead to
tion accuracy is getting better as the augmentation factor is good validation accuracy. The test set accuracy has reached
increased. It can be for many reasons, such as the valida- 93.32%afterdataaugmentation,whichisabout3%increase.
tion set becoming relatively easier compared to artificially Thetrainingaccuracyisnotdrasticallycomingdown,which
induced variations in the training set. In addition, the val- may be due to using moderate values for transformations
idation set is evaluated using all neurons in contrast to while augmenting the training set. Nevertheless, this set of
the aggressively dropped neurons during the training phase. experimentsdemonstratedconventionalwaystomitigatethe
Furthermore, having a similar sample distribution for the highvarianceproblemourmodelinitiallysuffered.
101484 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 17 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE21. Sampleaugmentedimagesbelongingtoacharacter[Row-1:
Rotation,Row-2:HorizontalShift,Row-3:VerticalShift,Row-4:Zoom,
Row-5:Multipleeffects].
FIGURE23. Thefine-tunedVGG16modelarchitecture.
FIGURE22. Train,testandvalidationaccuracyforvaryingaugmentation
factors.
it. First, all input samples were converted to 3D space
(64 × 64 × 3) to comply with the VGG16 architecture
B. USINGAFINE-TUNEDCNNARCHITECTURE– specifications.Then,theVGG16modelwasre-purposedby
TRANSFERLEARNING retaining the ImageNet weights and removing the top layer.
Finally, establishing a benchmark for the uTHCD dataset, We added two dense layers to fine-tune the model using
especiallyusingaCNN,wouldbeincompletewithoutadopt- the uTHCD database, as shown in Fig.23. This architecture
ing the transfer-learning approach. Transfer learning is a produced the optimal results compared to the models based
process where we reuse a model for a task different than onadifferentcombinationofVGG16layers,whichincluded
it was primarily learned [56]. Transfer learning offers sev- replacingjustthetoplayerandconsideringonlythefirstfew
eral advantages such as i) offering a better starting point convolutional blocks of VGG16. We carried out two types
to the new task in hand, ii) deep learning of a model with ofexperimentswiththepre-trainedmodel:withdropoutand
comparativelylesserdata,iii)rapidtrainingprocesssinceit withoutdropout,asshowninFig.24.
leveragesapre-trainedmodelwithoptimalweights,iv)serves Someobservationsbasedonthistransferlearningexperi-
as a feature extraction model, etc [57]. Hence, we used a mentareasbelow:
popular pre-trained model of the ImageNet challenge [58] 1) The model required only around eight epochs to con-
and reported its performances with various configurations. verge, which is around 1 of the number of epochs
3
Thiswillserveasafuturereferenceforefficacycomparisons needed to converge in the basic CNN model we pro-
ofpre-trainedmodelsontheuTHCDdatabase. posed.ThisisduetothefactthatweusedtheImageNet
Inspired by the demonstrated performance of the kernelweightsratherthantrainingitfromscratch.This
VGG16modelrecentlyonvarioustasks[52],[59],welever- isanadvantageintermsofthetrainingtimeofusinga
aged the pre-trained VGG16 [47] model by fine-tuning pre-trainedmodel.
VOLUME9,2021 101485

=== PAGE 18 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE24. ResultoffinetunedVGG16model[Left:WithDropout,Right:WithoutDropout].
TABLE6. Establishedbenchmark.
2) The accuracy of the model on test data is 92.32% Table-6summarizesthebenchmarkweestablishedforthe
which is no better than the basic CNN architec- proposeduTHCDdatabaseusingthevariousCNNmodels.
ture we used. However, the basic model required
three times the augmented data to achieve this. The
V. COMPARATIVESTUDYANDCLASSIFICATION
essenceofusingapre-trainedmodelliesinhoweffec-
RESULTSUSINGSOTA
tively the model generalizes with lesser training sam-
In this section, we compare the proposed uTHCD database
ples. Hence, the transfer learning approach helped us
withtheexistingHPLdatabase.Wedothisbyfirstcompar-
achieve on par performance on test data without data
ing the salient features of these two databases highlighting
augmentation.
prominentfeaturesthatpotentiallyleadtobetterOCRaccu-
3) The model without dropout rapidly overfits the data.
racy. Furthermore, classification results using traditional
This may be because the problem we are trying
machinelearningandSOTAalgorithmareanalyzed.
to solve is far simpler than the ImageNet chal-
lenge for which VGG16 weights were originally
established. A. SIGNIFICANCEOFTHEPROPOSEDuTHCDDATABASE
4) Althoughthepre-trainedmodelwithdropoutovercame Compared to the HPL database, the uTHCD database has
the overfitting problem, its performance on training
substantialbenefits,mainlyfromOCRuse-caseperspectives:
data is lesser than the basic CNN model we pro-
1) Modern deep learning algorithms for OCR need a
posed.Thisisduetousingthepre-trainedweightswith
considerable amount of samples to develop a robust
frozen layers. Setting those layers to trainable mode
model[61].TheuHTCDdatabasehas90950samples
withafinelytunedlearningratewouldprobablywork
withapproximately600sampleseachfrom156classes
best[60].
withtheprovisiontoenhancemoreinthecomingyears.
101486 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 19 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
This is around 13000 samples more compared to the TABLE7. Comparisonofexistingandproposeddatabases.
existingHPLdatabase.
2) Unlike the HPL dataset, the uTHCD database is a
unified collection of both offline and online samples.
Asmentionedearlier,theofflinesamplescaptureuseful
characteristics of scanned handwritten samples such
as distortion due to overwriting, variable thickness
of strokes, and stroke discontinuity (due to usage of
different writing tools). These are in addition to cap-
turing various writing styles through online samples
(Refer Fig.9). Hence, the OCR models created using
theuHTCDdatabasewillcapturetheseinherentchar-
acteristicsofascanneddocument;thereby,robustper-
formance is expected for automatic form processing.
TheHPLdatasetcapturesonlydifferentwritingstyles
Thetable-7providesaquickcomparisonbetweenuTHCD
(ReferFig.5).
andtheHPLdatabase.
3) As the HPL dataset is synthetically created from
theonlinepencoordinatesthroughinterpolationtech-
B. CLASSIFICATIONRESULTSUSINGSOTA
nique [30], characters formed have single-pixel width
Next, we report the results of some traditional and SOTA
strokes. On the other hand, the offline samples of the
classification algorithms using the proposed uTHCD and
uTHCDdatabasehaveinstancesofthesamecharacter
existing HPL datasets. The objective is to know the benefit
having a variable thickness of strokes as we had no
of the proposed dataset over the HPL dataset. We imple-
restriction on usage of writing media. Consequently,
mentedRandomForest(RF)[62],SupportVectorMachines
thepercentageofforegroundpixelsisnearly20%com-
(SVM) [63], and k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) [64] classifi-
pared to approximately 2% in HPL data. This high
cationalgorithms.TheRFalgorithmwasimplementedwith
degree of sparseness sometimes impedes the perfor-
100decisiontrees,andKNNmodelswereevaluatedbyhav-
manceofsomealgorithms.
ing the optimal K value. Results of these algorithms were
4) Each of the 156 classes has a uniform number
presentedusingbothrawpixelvaluesandfeaturesextracted
of samples, whereas the HPL database has sev-
using a pre-trained VGG16 model. Additionally, we used
eral under-represented classes. The machine learn-
the the fine-tuned VGG16 CNN architecture to observe the
ing based OCR algorithms can not robustly model
performanceonrespectivetestsetsoftheuTHCDandHPL
under-representedclasses[36].
datasets.
5) TheuTHCDdatabaseismadepubliclyavailablewith
Theaccuracyofthesealgorithmsusingthesetwodatabases
multiple proportions of train-test splits, and thus it
isshowninFig.25.
canbe usedtotest theefficacy oftraditionalmachine
Some crucial observations we made through this experi-
learningandmoderndeeplearningalgorithmswithout
mentareasbelow:
muchprocessingofdata.
6) The uTHCD database is available in both RAW and 1) TheresultsofRF,SVM,andKNNclassifiersproduced
convenient HDF5 format, facilitating rapid OCR pro- undesirableresultsusingtheHPLdatabase.Thisprob-
totyping and model testing. In addition, our database lemisprimarilyduetothesingle-pixelwidththickness
does not require any processing and is available in a ofcharacters,leadingtoahighdegreeofsparsenessin
ready-to-use form. However, the HPL database needs theHPLdata.
someprocessing.Forinstance,theGTdatafortraining 2) During the bootstrap data aggregation step of the RF
samples are not provided. Hence, initial processing algorithm,thesparsenessinimagematricesleadstothe
of HPL dataset is required at least with supervised highly correlated decision trees as they are randomly
algorithms. sampled.Thiswillresultintheformationofaweaker
7) The HPL dataset has some errors in the GT data. ensembleofdecisiontrees.
For instance, the test image 00043 is wrongly asso- 3) Asimilarreasoningcanbemadefortheperformanceof
ciated with GT class id 129 when it actually repre- theKNNalgorithmonHPLdata.TheKNNalgorithm
sents the class id 78. The uTHCD sample collection performed worst with raw pixel values. The reason
intheproposedworkunderwenttwolevelsofmanual couldbeagainduetothesingle-pixelwidthcharacter
verificationprocesses.Thisensuredsamplescollected patterns. The algorithm will have difficulty matching
andassociatedGTarerepresentativeoftheunderlying a pattern with another sample, especially when these
class. patternsarejustsinglepixelwidth.
8) In the future, we will expand the uTHCD database to 4) The SVM performs relatively better with raw pixel
catertotheever-evolvingresearchinthisfield. values compared to RF and KNN classifiers. This is
VOLUME9,2021 101487

=== PAGE 20 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE25. Resultsoftraditionalclassificationalgorithmsusingtheproposedandexistingdataset.
becausetheSVMprimarilymaximizesthemargin,and
henceitdependsonthedistancebetweenthedifferent
datapoints.
5) The points mentioned above can be substanti-
ated through a simple transfer learning approach
where the raw pixel values were transformed into
a rich feature maps represented by the pre-trained
VGG16 model [58]. The VGG16 model was trained
on millions of images, and hence it captures complex
features at different layers through its kernels. This is
the main reason for the enhanced accuracy of these
classifiersintransformedfeaturespace.
6) The traditional classifiers RF, SVM, and KNN algo-
FIGURE26. Performanceofdifferentclassifierswhentrainedusing
rithmsproducedundesirableresultsifdirectpixelval-
uTHCDandHPLdatasets.
ueswereused.Thishasacascadingeffect;forinstance,
anensembleofclassifiersapproachmayfailtoperform
wellduetothefailureofconstituentclassifierstomodel TheresultsareasshowninFig.26.Itcanbeascertainedthat
thedatareliably[65]. trainingontheproposeduTHCDdatabasehelpsclassifiersto
7) Performance of these classifiers with the uTHCD performeitherbetteroronparincontrasttowhenclassifiers
database was acceptable. This is mainly because the were trained using the HPL database. It is mainly because
sparseness is not substantial in the uTHCD database. theuTHCDdatabaseincludesbothonlineandofflinesamples
Furthermore, as expected, the VGG16 feature space helpingmodels tocaptureawide varietyofreal-timevaria-
enhanced the classifiers’ performance due to the pos- tions.Furthermore,theonlinesamplespresentintheuTHCD
sibleeliminationofredundancyexpressedthroughraw databaseallowclassifierstomodelthecommonlyexhibited
pixelvalues. HPLdatasetvariations.Hence,theperformanceontheHPL
This experiment suggests that the HPL dataset needs to be testwasbetterwhentrainedusingtheproposeddatabase.
representedinabetterfeaturespacebeforeareliableclassi- Theseexperimentssuggestthatthestate-of-the-artclassi-
fiercanbemodeledusingit. ficationalgorithmstrainedontheuTHCDdatabaseperform
Anotherexperimentwasconductedwherewetraineddif- better on test samples never seen during the training phase.
ferent classifiers with uTHCD samples but tested with the Furthermore, we believe that factors affecting handwritten
HPLdatasetandvice-versa.Theobjectiveofthistestwasto patterns(diversewritingstyles,usageofunconstrainedwrit-
determinetherobustnessofmodelsagainstreal-timeunseen ingtools,distortions,strokediscontinuity)arewellcaptured
variationscapturedthroughtheunderlyingtrainingset. throughonlineandofflinesamplesoftheuTHCD.Asaresult,
WeusedtheuTHCD_asettobeonparwiththeHPLtest itcanhelpachieverobustresultsforreal-timeOCRtestcases
set size. To be uniform, we considered 26000 samples for aswell.
testing from respective test sets. The results of RF, SVM, Nevertheless, the existence of multiple standardized
andKNNalgorithmswithtransformedVGG16featuremaps databases has several benefits. A majority of scientific
were only considered since direct raw pixels yielded poor study relies on the presence of standardized datasets for
results when both trained and tested using the HPL dataset. investigating a particular problem. It will facilitate research
101488 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 21 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
communities to focus on proposing solutions rather than
going through laborious data collection tasks. Moreover,
to test the efficiency of algorithms, it is essential to use
multifaceteddatatotestallcornercases.Ingeneral,thecorner
casesdonotcomefromonesetofdatabutmultipledatasets.
Hence, both existing and proposed datasets lead to bench-
markingnewsolutionsforTamilhandwrittenOCR,leadingto
robustlanguagetechnologiesinvolvingspeech,handwriting
andtextsamples.
VI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
Works relating to Tamil Handwritten character recognition
havereliedonasolitarystandardizeddatabaseforthelongest
time. However, having multiple standardized databases for
a research problem can contribute positively in many ways
to the advancement of that research field. In this work,
wedelineatedtheextensiveworkinvolvedincreatingacom-
prehensive handwritten Tamil isolated character database.
Thisdatabaseconsistsofhandwrittensamplescollectedfrom
bothphysicalanddigitalforms.Thedatabaseandnecessary
groundtruthdatahavebeenmadepubliclyavailableinboth
RAWandHDF5formats.Ourworkpresentedmanyusecases
for this dataset by applying CNN models for classification
Listing.1. PythonCodetoExtractuTHCDDataset
purposes and reporting the baseline accuracy. Additionally,
we also ascertained that models trained on the proposed
databaseachievebetterOCRaccuracywhentestedonunseen
data.
In the future, the proposed database can be augmented illustrated as shown in Fig.27. The file has a directory-like
through the application of generative adversarial networks. structure with two groups of datasets labeled as Train data
The resulting expansion may pose more challenges to the and Test data. Within the Train data group, the size nor-
ever-evolvingfeatureextractionalgorithmsanddeeplearning malized 62870 uTHCD_a train images are stored in a 3D
framework. Various studies can be conducted to determine matrix, namely x_train, and the corresponding class labels
the fundamental efficacy/limitations of the state-of-the-art are stored in the 1D vector y_train. The size of x_train and
feature extraction and classification algorithms for Tamil y_train are respectively (62870, 64, 64) and (62870,1). The
OCR using the uTHCD database. Furthermore, it would be 28080testimagesandcorrespondinglabelsintheTestData
particularlyinterestingtoseetheapplicationoftheuTHCD group are likewise stored respectively in x_test and y_test
databaseintheperformanceofcharacterpatternoverlapping variables.
usingapatternseparationnetwork[14]. Given this file structure, the Python code shown in
The creation of this database is expected to contribute Listing1toextractthetrainandtestdataisrelativelystraight-
to the efficient model development for Tamil OCR, facil- forward. Lines 1-2 import two Python packages: NumPy
itate the research community to objectively evaluate the and h5py. The NumPy package is necessary to represent
state-of-the-artalgorithms,andinstigatemoreresearchwork the extracted train and test data as multidimensional arrays
inTamilhandwritingcharacterrecognition. suitable for subsequent computational processes. The h5py
moduleisutilizedtoextractthedatasetsfromtheHDFformat
APPENDIX filewiththe.h5extension.
HIERARCHICALDATAFORMAT(HDF) Line3readstheuTHCDcompressedhdf5file.Lines4-5
FORTHEuTHDCDATABASE extract the base group items and print their names (‘Train
This section demonstrates the HDF5 file structure of the Data’ and ‘Test Data’). Line 6 extracts the ‘Train Data’
uTHCD database and explains the method of extracting groupfollowedbyLines7-8thatprintthedatasetwithinthis
train,test,andvalidationsetsfromitusingasimplePython group(x_trainandy_train).Similarly,Line9andLines10-11
script.WhilethecodedemonstratesextractingtheuTHCD_a respectively extract the ‘Test Data’ group and print the
repository, the same is also applicable for the remaining dataset within it (x_test and y_test). Lines 12-15 respec-
repositories. tivelyextractx_train,y_train,x_test,andy_testandrepresent
The HDF5 file is a convenient file format with.h5 exten- them as multidimensional arrays. Once these datasets are
sion to store and organize huge data [66]. The file struc- extracted, Lines 16-19 extracts the validation set out of the
ture used to organize the uTHCD database in this format is trainingset.
VOLUME9,2021 101489

=== PAGE 22 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE27. DataorganizationofuTHCDinHDF5fileformat.
FIGURE28. Charactertoclassmappingwithunicode.
We can use the same code to extract the rest of the input image to corresponding editable Tamil character can
uTHCD repositories of varying train-test split proportions. bedoneusingUnicodecharacterencodingofTamilscriptas
Additional details to convert the classification result of an showninFig.28andFig.29.
101490 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 23 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
FIGURE29. Charactertoclassmappingwithunicode–continued.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [8] M. Chandrasekaran, R. Chandrasekaran, and G. Siromoney, ‘‘Context
The authors would like to profoundly thank reviewers for dependentrecognitionofhandprintedTamilcharacters,’’inProc.Int.Conf.
Syst.ManCybern.,vol.2,1983,pp.786–790.
their critical reading and thoughtful comments, which sig-
[9] C.Vinotheni,S.L.Pandian,andG.Lakshmi,‘‘Modifiedconvolutional
nificantly improved the overall quality of the work. They neuralnetworkoftamilcharacterrecognition,’’inAdvancesinDistributed
would also like to thank Dr. Mufti Mahmud, Nottingham ComputingandMachineLearning(LectureNotesinNetworksandSys-
tems),vol.127,A.Tripathy,M.Sarkar,J.Sahoo,K.C.Li,andS.Chinara,
Trent University, for several resourceful discussions during
Eds. Singapore: Springer, 2021, doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-4218-
thisresearchstudy. 3_46.
[10] R.B.LincyandR.Gayathri,‘‘Optimallyconfiguredconvolutionalneural
REFERENCES networkforTamilhandwrittencharacterrecognitionbyimprovedlionopti-
[1] I.Mahadevan,EarlyTamilEpigraphyFromtheEarliestTimestotheSixth mizationmodel,’’MultimediaToolsAppl.,vol.80,no.4,pp.5917–5943,
CenturyAD(H.O.Series),vol.62.Cambridge,U.K.:HarvardUniv.Press, Feb.2021.
2003. [11] H. Choudhury and S. R. M. Prasanna, ‘‘Handwriting recognition
[2] S.B.Steever,‘‘Tamilwriting,’’inTheWorld’sWritingSystems.NewYork, using sinusoidal model parameters,’’ Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 121,
NY,USA:OxfordUniv.Press,1996,pp.426–430. pp.87–96,Apr.2019.
[3] L.CampbellandV.Grondona,‘‘Review:Ethnologue:Languagesofthe [12] T.M.Ghanim,M.I.Khalil,andH.M.Abbas,‘‘Comparativestudyon
worldbyRaymondG.Gordon,’’Language,vol.84,no.3,pp.636–641, deepconvolutionneuralnetworksDCNN-basedofflinearabichandwriting
2008. recognition,’’IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.95465–95482,2020.
[4] P.B.PatiandA.G.Ramakrishnan,‘‘OCRinIndianscripts:Asurvey,’’
[13] Current State of OCR: Is it a Solved Problem in 2021?
IETETech.Rev.,vol.22,no.3,pp.217–227,May2005.
Accessed:May4,2021.[Online].Available:https://research.aimultiple.
[5] U.PalandB.B.Chaudhuri,‘‘Indianscriptcharacterrecognition:Asur-
com/ocr-technology/
vey,’’PatternRecognit.,vol.37,no.9,pp.1887–1899,Sep.2004.
[14] N. Modhej, A. Bastanfard, M. Teshnehlab, and S. Raiesdana, ‘‘Pattern
[6] A. Chaudhuri, K. Mandaviya, P. Badelia, and S. K. Ghosh, ‘‘Optical
separation network based on the hippocampus activity for handwritten
character recognition systems,’’ in Optical Character Recognition Sys-
recognition,’’IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.212803–212817,2020.
temsforDifferentLanguagesWithSoftComputing(StudiesinFuzziness
andSoftComputing),vol.352.Cham,Switzerland:Springer,2017,doi: [15] A.Singh,K.Bacchuwar,andA.Bhasin,‘‘AsurveyofOCRapplications,’’
10.1007/978-3-319-50252-6_2. Int.J.Mach.Learn.Comput.,vol.2,no.3,p.314,2012.
[7] G.Siromoney,R.Chandrasekaran,andM.Chandrasekaran,‘‘Computer [16] X.-F.Yue,S.-X.Jiao,L.-Q.Han,andH.-Z.LI,‘‘SurveyofOCRandits
recognitionofprintedTamilcharacters,’’PatternRecognit.,vol.10,no.4, applicationsinpatternrecognition,’’HebeiJ.Ind.Sci.Technol.,vol.23,
pp.243–247,Jan.1978. no.5,p.312,2006.
VOLUME9,2021 101491

=== PAGE 24 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
[17] X.Peng,H.Cao,S.Setlur,V.Govindaraju,andP.Natarajan,‘‘Multilingual [39] T. MJose and A. Wahi, ‘‘Recognition of Tamil handwritten charac-
OCRresearchandapplications:Anoverview,’’inProc.4thInt.Workshop ters using Daubechies wavelet transforms and feed-forward backprop-
Multilingual(OCR-MOCR),2013,pp.1–8. agation network,’’ Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 64, no. 8, pp.26–29,
[18] R. Sharma and B. Kaushik, ‘‘Offline recognition of handwritten Indic Feb.2013.
scripts:Astate-of-the-artsurveyandfutureperspectives,’’Comput.Sci. [40] N. Shanthi and K. Duraiswamy, ‘‘A novel SVM-based handwritten
Rev.,vol.38,Nov.2020,Art.no.100302. Tamilcharacterrecognitionsystem,’’PatternAnal.Appl.,vol.13,no.2,
[19] M.Agrawal,A.S.Bhaskarabhatla,andS.Madhvanath,‘‘Datacollection pp.173–180,May2010.
forhandwritingcorpuscreationinIndicscripts,’’inProc.Int.Conf.Speech [41] S. Thadchanamoorthy, N. D. Kodikara, H. L. Premaretne, U. Pal, and
Lang. Technol. Oriental COCOSDA (ICSLT-COCOSDA), New Delhi, F.Kimura, ‘‘Tamil handwritten city name database development and
India,Nov.2004. recognition for postal automation,’’ in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Document
[20] A.Alaei,P.Nagabhushan,andU.Pal,‘‘AbenchmarkKannadahandwritten Anal.Recognit.,Aug.2013,pp.793–797.
document dataset and its segmentation,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Document [42] B. Nethravathi, C. Archana, K. Shashikiran, A. G. Ramakrishnan, and
Anal.Recognit.,Sep.2011,pp.141–145. V.Kumar,‘‘CreationofahugeannotateddatabaseforTamilandKan-
[21] N. Das, J. M. Reddy, R. Sarkar, S. Basu, M. Kundu, M. Nasipuri,
nada OHR,’’ in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Frontiers Handwriting Recognit.,
andD.K.Basu,‘‘Astatistical–topologicalfeaturecombinationforrecog-
Nov.2010,pp.415–420.
nition of handwritten numerals,’’ Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 12, no. 8,
[43] S.A.Mahmoud,I.Ahmad,W.G.Al-Khatib,M.Alshayeb,M.T.Parvez,
pp.2486–2495,Aug.2012.
V.Märgner,andG.A.Fink,‘‘KHATT:AnopenArabicofflinehandwritten
[22] P. K. Singh, R. Sarkar, N. Das, S. Basu, M. Kundu, and M. Nasipuri,
textdatabase,’’PatternRecognit.,vol.47,no.3,pp.1096–1112,2014.
‘‘Benchmark databases of handwritten Bangla-Roman and Devanagari-
[44] P.DeyandS.Noushath,‘‘E-PCP:Arobustskewdetectionmethodfor
Romanmixed-scriptdocumentimages,’’MultimediaToolsAppl.,vol.77,
scanneddocumentimages,’’PatternRecognit.,vol.43,no.3,pp.937–948,
no.7,pp.8441–8473,Apr.2018.
Mar.2010.
[23] N. Das, R. Sarkar, S. Basu, M. Kundu, M. Nasipuri, and D. K. Basu,
[45] A.Krizhevsky,I.Sutskever,andG.E.Hinton,‘‘ImageNetclassification
‘‘Ageneticalgorithmbasedregionsamplingforselectionoflocalfeatures
withdeepconvolutionalneuralnetworks,’’inProc.Adv.NeuralInf.Pro-
inhandwrittendigitrecognitionapplication,’’Appl.SoftComput.,vol.12,
cess.Syst.(NIPS),vol.25,Dec.2012,pp.1097–1105.
no.5,pp.1592–1606,May2012.
[46] C.Szegedy,W.Liu,Y.Jia,P.Sermanet,S.Reed,D.Anguelov,D.Erhan,
[24] N. Das, S. Basu, R. Sarkar, M. Kundu, M. Nasipuri, and D.K.Basu,
V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, ‘‘Going deeper with convolutions,’’
‘‘An improved feature descriptor for recognition of handwritten
Bangla alphabet,’’ 2015, arXiv:1501.05497. [Online]. Available: http://
inProc.IEEEConf.Comput.Vis.PatternRecognit.(CVPR),Jun.2015,
pp.1–9.
arxiv.org/abs/1501.05497
[25] N. Das, K. Acharya, R. Sarkar, S. Basu, M. Kundu, and M. Nasipuri, [47] K.SimonyanandA.Zisserman,‘‘Verydeepconvolutionalnetworksfor
‘‘AbenchmarkimagedatabaseofisolatedBanglahandwrittencompound large-scaleimagerecognition,’’2014,arXiv:1409.1556.[Online].Avail-
characters,’’Int.J.DocumentAnal.Recognit.,vol.17,no.4,pp.413–431, able:http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
Dec.2014. [48] F. Chollet, ‘‘Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convo-
[26] N.Das,R.Sarkar,S.Basu,P.K.Saha,M.Kundu,andM.Nasipuri,‘‘Hand- lutions,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
written bangla character recognition using a soft computing paradigm Jul.2017,pp.1251–1258.
embedded in two pass approach,’’ Pattern Recognit., vol. 48, no. 6, [49] D. M. W. Powers, ‘‘Evaluation: From precision, recall and
pp.2054–2071,Jun.2015. F-measure to ROC, informedness, markedness and correlation,’’ 2020,
[27] R. Sarkar, N. Das, S. Basu, M. Kundu, M. Nasipuri, and D. K. Basu, arXiv:2010.16061.[Online].Available:http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.16061
‘‘CMATERdb1: A database of unconstrained handwritten Bangla and [50] M.Z.Alom,T.M.Taha,C.Yakopcic,S.Westberg,P.Sidike,M.S.Nasrin,
Bangla–Englishmixedscriptdocumentimage,’’Int.J.DocumentAnal. M.Hasan,B.C.VanEssen,A.A.S.Awwal,andV.K.Asari,‘‘Astate-of-
Recognit.,vol.15,no.1,pp.71–83,Mar.2012. the-artsurveyondeeplearningtheoryandarchitectures,’’Electron,vol.8,
[28] U.BhattacharyaandB.B.Chaudhuri,‘‘Databasesforresearchonrecog- no.3,p.292,Mar.2019.
nitionofhandwrittencharactersofIndianscripts,’’inProc.8thInt.Conf. [51] Y.Bengio,‘‘Practicalrecommendationsforgradient-basedtrainingofdeep
DocumentAnal.Recognit.(ICDAR),2005,pp.789–793. architectures,’’inNeuralNetworks:TricksoftheTrade(LectureNotesin
[29] K. S. Dash, N. B. Puhan, and G. Panda, ‘‘Odia character recognition: ComputerScience),vol.7700,G.Montavon,G.B.Orr,andK.R.Müller,
A directional review,’’ Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 48, no. 4, pp.473–497, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-
Dec.2017. 8_26.
[30] The HPL Isolated Handwritten Tamil Character Dataset. [52] S.Singh,A.Sharma,andV.K.Chauhan,‘‘OnlinehandwrittenGurmukhi
Accessed: May 4, 2021 [Online]. Available: http://lipitk.sourceforge. wordrecognitionusingfine-tuneddeepconvolutionalneuralnetworkon
net/datasets/tamilchardata.htm offlinefeatures,’’Mach.Learn.Appl.,vol.5,Sep.2021,Art.no.100037.
[31] F.HajamohideenandS.Noushath,‘‘Kalanjiyam:Unconstrainedoffline [53] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
tamilhandwrittendatabase,’’inComputerVision,Graphics,andImage R.Salakhutdinov, ‘‘Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
Processing(LectureNotesinComputerScience),vol.10481,S.Mukherjee fromoverfitting,’’J.Mach.Learn.Res.,vol.15,no.1,pp.1929–1958,
etal.,Eds.Cham,Switzerland:Springer,2017,doi:10.1007/978-3-319- 2014.
68124-5_24. [54] S.ParkandN.Kwak,‘‘Analysisonthedropouteffectinconvolutional
[32] B.R.KavithaandC.Srimathi,‘‘Benchmarkingonofflinehandwritten
neural networks,’’ in Computer Vision—ACCV 2016 (Lecture Notes in
Tamilcharacterrecognitionusingconvolutionalneuralnetworks,’’J.King
Computer Science), vol. 10112, S. H. Lai, V. Lepetit, K. Nishino, and
SaudUniv.Comput.Inf.Sci.,Jun.2019,doi:10.1016/j.jksuci.2019.06.004.
Y.Sato,Eds.Cham,Switzerland:Springer,2017,doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
[33] R.KunwarandA.G.Ramakrishnan,‘‘Onlinehandwritingrecognitionof
54184-6_12.
Tamilscriptusingfractalgeometry,’’inProc.Int.Conf.DocumentAnal.
[55] C.ShortenandT.M.Khoshgoftaar,‘‘Asurveyonimagedataaugmentation
Recognit.,Sep.2011,pp.1389–1393.
fordeeplearning,’’J.BigData,vol.6,no.1,pp.1–48,Dec.2019.
[34] A. G. Ramakrishnan and K. B. Urala, ‘‘Global and local features for
[56] M.A.KoandS.Poruran,‘‘OCR-Nets:Variantsofpre-trainedCNNfor
recognitionofonlinehandwrittennumeralsandTamilcharacters,’’inProc.
urduhandwrittencharacterrecognitionviatransferlearning,’’Procedia
4thInt.WorkshopMultilingual(OCRMOCR),2013,pp.1–5.
[35] P.VijayaraghavanandM.Sra,‘‘HandwrittenTamilrecognitionusinga Comput.Sci.,vol.171,pp.2294–2301,Jan.2020.
convolutionalneuralnetwork,’’inProc.Int.Conf.Inf.,Commun.,Eng. [57] L. Torrey and J. Shavlik, ‘‘Transfer learning,’’ in Handbook of
Technol.(ICICET),2014,pp.1–4. Research on Machine Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms,
[36] G. Strang, Linear Algebra and Learning From Data. London, U.K.: methods, and Techniques. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2010,
Wellesley,2019. pp.242–264.
[37] P.BanumathiandG.M.Nasira,‘‘HandwrittenTamilcharacterrecognition [58] O.Russakovsky,J.Deng,H.Su,J.Krause,S.Satheesh,S.Ma,Z.Huang,
using artificial neural networks,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Process Autom., A.Karpathy,A.Khosla,M.Bernstein,A.C.Berg,andL.Fei-Fei,‘‘Ima-
ControlComput.,Jul.2011,pp.1–5. geNet large scale visual recognition challenge,’’ Int. J. Comput. Vis.,
[38] S. Kowsalya and P. S. Periasamy, ‘‘Recognition of Tamil handwritten vol.115,no.3,pp.211–252,Dec.2015.
character using modified neural network with aid of elephant herding [59] M.ShorfuzzamanandM.S.Hossain,‘‘MetaCOVID:ASiameseneural
optimization,’’MultimediaToolsAppl.,vol.78,no.17,pp.25043–25061, networkframeworkwithcontrastivelossforn-shotdiagnosisofCOVID-
Sep.2019. 19patients,’’PatternRecognit.,vol.113,May2021,Art.no.107700.
101492 VOLUME9,2021

=== PAGE 25 ===
N.Shaffi,F.Hajamohideen:uTHCD:NewBenchmarkingforTamilHandwrittenOCR
[60] S.Kornblith,J.Shlens,andQ.V.Le,‘‘DobetterImageNetmodelstransfer FAIZAL HAJAMOHIDEEN received the Ph.D.
better?’’inProc.IEEE/CVFConf.Comput.Vis.PatternRecognit.(CVPR), degree in 2017. He is currently a Lecturer with
Jun.2019,pp.2661–2671. theDepartmentofInformationTechnology,Uni-
[61] C.Boufenar,A.Kerboua,andM.Batouche,‘‘Investigationondeeplearn- versity of Technology and College of Applied
ingforoff-linehandwrittenArabiccharacterrecognition,’’Cognit.Syst. Sciences (UTAS), Sohar, Oman. He has over
Res.,vol.50,pp.180–195,Aug.2018. 20yearsofexperienceinresearchandeducation
[62] T.K.Ho,‘‘Randomdecisionforests,’’inProc.3rdInt.Conf.Document
field. He has gained industrial oriented certifi-
Anal.Recognit.,vol.1,Aug.1995,pp.278–282.
catesinnetworkingandoperatingsystems.Hehas
[63] M.A.Hearst,S.T.Dumais,E.Osman,J.Platt,andB.Scholkopf,‘‘Support
designed,developed,anddeliveredtechnicaltrain-
vector machines,’’ IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp.18–28,
inginvarioussubjectssuchasnetworking,cloud
Jul./Aug.2008.
computing,cybersecurity,andbigdataanalysis.Hehasledmanyresearch
[64] T. Cover and P. Hart, ‘‘Nearest neighbor pattern classification,’’ IEEE
projects in the subject area. He has acquired funded research projects,
Trans.Inf.Theory,vol.IT-13,no.1,pp.21–27,Jan.1967.
[65] R.Polikar,‘‘Ensemblebasedsystemsindecisionmaking,’’IEEECircuits such as URG-TRC, Oman, and OCCI, Oman. He has good knowledge
Syst.Mag.,vol.6,no.3,pp.21–45,Sep.2006. about Linux-based SDN, Big Data Hadoop, NS3, and Python3 tools for
[66] TheHDF5LibraryandFileFormat.Accessed:May31,2021.[Online]. research. He was involved in the Research Council (TRC), Oman, spon-
Available:https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/ soredimageprocessingandmachinelearningand4Gworkshops.Hehas
clearedacertificatewithintellectualpropertysponsoredbyUTAS.Hehas
publishedarticlesinnationalandinternationaljournals.Hehascoauthored
and published in international journals. His areas of interests are image
NOUSHATH SHAFFI received the B.Sc., mas- processing,deeplearning,cloudcomputing,andhybridnetworks.Heisan
ter’s,andPh.D.degreesinimageprocessingfrom ActiveMemberoftheScientificResearchDepartment(SRD)andrepresent-
theUniversityofMysore,in2001,2004,and2008, ing Information Technology Department, UTAS. He has participated and
respectively. presentedIEEEandIETconferences.
AfterhisPh.D.,hejoinedHPLabs,India,where
heworkedpredominantlyondocumentimagepro-
cessing.Histopicofresearchwasfacerecognition.
PriortojoiningCAS,Sohar,in2009,hehasbeen
working as a Research Consultant with Hewlett
PackardLaboratories,India,since2007.Heiscur-
rentlyworkingasanAssistantProfessorattheUniversityofTechnology
andAppliedSciences(UTAS),Oman.HeisalsotheHeadoftheResearch
Department and Technology Transfer Office at UTAS. He was part of a
team which successfully developed and implemented an algorithm in the
hardwareplatformtoautomaticallyskewcorrectthedocument.Hehasover
ten(reputed)publicationsinallareasofinterestandthreeU.S.patentshave
beenpublished.Hisresearchinterestsincludebiometrics,documentanalysis,
andapplicationofsubspacealgorithmsforimagerecognition.Hereceived
severalresearchgrantsfromtheResearchCouncilofOmanandrecipientof
theNationalResearchAwardforthebestundergraduateprojectmentoredin
theICTsector.
VOLUME9,2021 101493

